What is AWS? AWS or Amazon Web Services is a cloud service provider that offers various computing services that are accessible over the public internet.

AWS and other public cloud vendors — like Google Cloud Platform (GCP) and Microsoft Azure — manage and maintain hardware and infrastructure, saving organizations and individuals the cost and complexity of purchasing and running resources on site. These resources may be accessed for free or on a pay-per-use basis.

To get a better understanding of AWS, it can help to wrap your head around how massive AWS is. There's no denying it, AWS is kind of a big deal. How big?

One in three sites you visit on the internet uses AWS services. 
In 2019, Amazon Web Services raked in more than $35 billion in revenue. If AWS were its own company, that would be enough to rank 359th on fortune magazine's Global 500 list.
With that being said here is a 10,000-foot overview of AWS. Let’s dive in!


The history of AWS
The origins of AWS are kind of unintentional. Way back around the year 2000, Amazon was still just a scrappy e-commerce company that found itself struggling to grow under all the technical debt that it accumulated since its startup days.

Very much out of necessity, Amazon made the strategic technology decision to start building reusable modules for its internal development groups. This allowed those groups to create new features faster because they weren't always reinventing the same things over and over.

As time went on, the collection of internal services grew, and people inside the company started to realize that maybe there was a potential business opportunity there.

First launched in 2004 and then relaunched in 2006 with three public pay-as-you-go services, Amazon Web Services set sail into the uncharted waters of what we now call cloud computing.

After it launched in 2006, for the next few years, AWS enjoyed a relatively quiet competitive landscape, allowing it to build a dramatic headstart over contemporary competitors like Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud Platform.

AWS has been the dominant cloud provider for a while and is the clear market-share leader at present.

However, in the past few years, that market share has been eroding slightly, largely going to Microsoft Azure. But competition is a good thing, and AWS has momentum, market-share profitability, and some really smart people on its side. The innovation and customer focus are greater than ever. 

What's the future hold for AWS? They say no one can predict the future . . . but we asked a panel of experts to do it anyways. Check out our 7 predictions for AWS.


AWS infrastructure and technology
AWS operates globally in what are called regions — 25 in all spread across six continents. Each region consists of multiple availability zones. And these are the physical data centers where computers live and are geographically separated to reduce the likelihood of a local disaster taking out a whole region.